# DICE credential certification

This crate hosts tools used by the manufacturing side of the DeviceId
certification process. The goal of the certification process is to create an
x.509 certificate that binds a secret known only to the RoT
(DeviceId<sub>priv</sub>) to the platform serial number.
DeviceId<sub>priv</sub> is only available to the RoT and so certification
requires a message exchange between the RoT and a system on the manufacturing
line (the programming station). The remainder of this document describes the
commands used to exchange these messages with the RoT and some additional tools
used to simplify the process. In the message exchange the programming station
is always the initiator and the RoT is always the responder.

## dice-mfg
The `dice-mfg` executable provides a subcommand for each message exchanged with
the RoT. The certification process requires additional tools to perform the
functions of a certificate authority. These tools build on top of the
`dice-mfg` to accomplish their tasks.

The purpose of each subcommand in the `dice-mfg` tool are as follows:

### manufacture
The `manufacture` command is the TL;DR: This command performs the functions
required of the manufacturing side of the DeviceId certification process. This
command has several required options:
- `--openssl-cnf` - An openssl config file used for certificate signing.
- `--intermediate-cert` - A PEM encoded certificate for the intermediate CA
signing CSRs.
- The serial number assigned to the device being manufactured provided as a
positional parameter.

With this data the `manufacture` command runs through the steps necessary to
create and program the DICE manufacturing artifacts into the RoT. The commands
required to accomplish this task are discussed next.

### liveness
This command builds on top of the `ping` command discussed below. It is
designed to send a predetermined number of `Ping` messages to the RoT. Errors
and timeouts are ignored and this command will continue to ping the RoT until
it receives a successful `Ack`, or until it exceeds a configurable message
threshold. This value can be overridden with the `--max-retry` option. We
recommend executing this command as the first step in the message exchange to
ensure the serial connection is functional and the RoT is responsive.

Example:
```sh
$ cargo run --bin dice-mfg -- liveness
```

### sign-cert
This command is a thin wrapper around the `openssl ca` command, it doesn't send
any commands to the RoT. We include this functionality in the `dice-mfg` tool
for ease of use. Given a sufficiently complete openssl config file, like the
one generated by the `init-dice-intermediate-ca.sh` script in the parent
directory, `sign-cert` can be used to sign CSRs and create x509 certs.

This command use the defaults from the provided openssl config as much as
possible. The benefit of this approach is that the options to the command are
reasonably few. The down side is that the openssl config used must have a
sufficiently complete config for use w/o supplying additional data on the
command line.

To adapt this command to differing needs callers can supply the script with
specific CA and x509 v3 config sections. Finally the `--yubi` option causes the
command to use an openssl engine compatible with yubikeys.

Example:
```sh
$ cargo run --bin dice-mfg -- sign-cert --openssl-cfg /path/to/openssl.cnf
--csr-in /path/to/csr.pem --cert-out /path/to/cert.pem
```

### ping
The UART on the LPC55 is not immediately reliable when power is first applied
to the device. This causes the first several messages exchanged over the UART
to be corrupted or lost. When the RoT receives a `ping` message it will respond
with an `ack`. This message can be used to test the liveness of the
communication link and the RoT.

Example:
```sh
$ cargo run --bin dice-mfg -- ping
```

### set-serial-number
Certificate issuance begins with a CSR. The DeviceId<sub>priv</sub> is only
known to the RoT and so the RoT must create this CSR. In order for the cert to
bind the assigned serial number with DeviceId<priv> it is added to the
`serialNumber` field of the `subject`. The RoT does not however know the
platform serial number until told by the programming station. The
`set-serial-number` command sends the provided serial number to the RoT.

Example:
```sh
$ cargo run --bin dice-mfg -- set-serial-number "XXXXXXXXXXX"
```

### get-csr
Once the RoT knows its serial number it can create a CSR. This subcommand
requests a CSR from the RoT. The CSR is received as a DER encoded PKCS#10 / CSR
and converted to PEM before being written to the specified file.

Example:
```sh
$ cargo run --bin dice-mfg -- get-csr /path/to/csr.pem
```

### set-device-id
As part of the attestation process the RoT must present a certificate chain to
the requester. This cert chain is used to establish trust in the credentials
using PKI path validation that leads back to a trusted root. Once the
programming station has received the CSR and created a cert from it the cert
must be sent to the RoT where it is persisted. This command takes a path to a
cert file and sends it to the RoT. No validation is done to test the validity
of the cert. The programming station is trusted to faithfully perform the
certificate authority operation or to proxy them to an appropriate external
system.

Example:
```sh
$ cargo run --bin dice-mfg -- set-device-id /path/to/deviceid.cert.pem
```

### set-intermediate
Signing certs using a root cert is generally discouraged. PKI best practices
recommend using at least one intermediate certificate in the PKI chain to
simplify and minimize the impact of certificate revocation. The current
implementation uses a single intermediate cert that is persisted on the
platform along with the DeviceId cert. This intermediate cert is sent to the
platform by the `set-intermediate` command.

Example:
```sh
$ cargo run --bin dice-mfg -- set-device-id /path/to/intermediate.cert.pem
```
